Welcome to the Embedded Systems Programming course. My name is Miro
Samek and I'd like to teach you how to program embedded microcontrollers
in C.

This course is structured as a series of short, focused, fast paced,
hands-on lessons.

In this first lesson, we will get started by installing a free embedded
development toolset and ordering a very inexpensive development board so
you can actually run your code on a real microcontroller.

Your own embedded board is certainly a lot of fun, but you can also
follow along even without the board, because I will show you how to use
an instruction set simulator.

The C language that you are going to learn is a so called "high-level"
programming language, but I will also frequently step down to the low
level of machine code and show you exactly what happens inside the
embedded processor.

You will actually see how the processor executes your code, how it
manipulates data, and how a computer can "do" things in the real world,
such as turn on and off an LED.

This deeper understanding will allow you to use the C language more
efficiently and with greater confidence. You will gain understanding not
just what for your program does, but also how the C statements translate
to machine instructions and how fast the processor can execute them.

The processor we are going to use in this course is called ARM
Cortex-M4F, but what you'll learn will apply to the whole Cortex-M
family starting from Cortex-M0, through M0+, Cortex-M3, and M4. The
Cortex-M processor family I've chosen for this course is the most
popular, modern, and energy efficient family of processor cores you can
find in embedded microcontrollers today and for many years to come.
Also, familiarity with ARM Cortex will look really good on your resume.

So let's get started...

The first thing you need is the embedded toolset. For this course, I've
selected the professional toolset from IAR systems called EWARM, which
stands for Embedded Workbench for ARM. The commercial version of this
tool is one of the most expensive on the market, but IAR also offers the
*free* size-limited, but not time-limited evaluation version of this
toolset, which I will show you how to download and install in a minute.

Before we do this, though, I'd only like to mention that I'm not
associated with IAR or any microcontroller vendor for that matter. I've
simply selected the free evaluation edition of their toolset, because it
has all the features I need in this course, such as a state of-the-art C
and C++ compiler, a nice embedded debugger, and an ARM instruction set
simulator.

To download IAR EWARM, point your browser to iar.com...

Select the the Service Center menu and click on the Downloads link.

On the downloads page, click on the latest Size-limited version of the
ARM toolset.

On the next page, scroll down and click on the Download software link.

This download can take a while, because the file is over 900MB in size.

After the download completes, show the file in folder ... double click
on it... and run the installer.

Click on Install IAR Embedded Workbench.

Accept the license, and all default settings...

This dialog box asks if you want to install a license dongle on your
system. Click NO.

Finally, installation copletes. Click Finish.

Exit from the IAR navigation pane

When the IAR Embedded Workbench comes up for the first time you will be
presented with the Registration dialog box. Click Register.

This will open the IAR registration form on your browser that you need
to fill out.

Here the most important step is to Select the Code Size limited license
type.

You need to fill out all the required fields... and finally you can
click on Submit Registration.

The IAR registration requires the confirmation of your email address.

When you receive the email from IAR, open it and click on the
registration link.

This opens a web page with your license number, which you need to copy
to the clipboard.

Next, switch to the IAR Embedded Workbench, and select the Help->License
Manager... menu.

Finally, copy the license number from to the provided space and click next.

Click next to activate the license.

All right, your license is now installed and the tool is ready to use.

In the last step of this lesson I will show you how to order an
inexpensive evaluation board called Stellaris Launchpad from Texas
Instruments.

I repeat, that this step is optional, because you can use the ARM
instruction set simulator in the IAR toolset to follow along in most of
the upcoming lessons.

I'd also like to mention that I'm not associated with Texas Instruments
or any other microcontroller vendor. I've simply selected this
particular TI board, because it is completely self-contained. The board
is powered from a USB connector and has a complete hardware debugger,
which will enable us to look inside the processor. The LaunchPad has a
32-bit ARM Cortex-M4F microcontroller, many peripherals, a bright
multi-color LED, two user switches, and connectors for experimentation
and furture expansion. Evaluation boards like this used to cost hundred
of dollars just a few years ago, but now TI sells this board for only
12.99 US dollars.

So, if you wish to order this board, point your browser to ti.com.

In the search box, type Stellaris Launchpad

Click on the BUY NOW link

Click on add to cart and proceed to checkout

This concludes the setup part of the course. In the next lesson you will
learn how to create your first project in the IAR toolset and watch it
run in the simulator and on the LaunchPad board.

If you have any questions or comments about this course, please visit
state-machine.com/quickstart, where you can find all currently available
lessons, class notes, and projects.

---
Links used in this lesson:
IAR EWARM download: http://www.iar.com/en/Service-Center/Downloads/
TI Stellaris/Tiva LaunchPad board: http://www.ti.com/tool/ek-tm4c123gxl

Course web-page:
http://www.state-machine.com/quickstart

YouTube playlist of the course:
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLPW8O6W-1chwyTzI3BHwBLbGQoPFxPAPM

